---
title: "Feeling stressed and burnt out"
date:  2021-04-11 20:00:00 +1300
---

<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/cVWZ8dVs5VOEvdhH1M" width="480" height="480" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen title="burnout-coffee-gif"></iframe><p><a href="https://giphy.com/gifs/coffee-morning-caffein-cVWZ8dVs5VOEvdhH1M">via GIPHY</a></p>

Burnout is real.

This was written to share my experience with burnout, and if I ever do experience it again a reminder of what I could do to help myself recover from it. If you're experiencing burnout or find yourself on the way to burnout, you should address it and don't let it cripple you. It can get serious, and below are some things I've done to help myself recover from burnout. Remember, some of these might work for you, others might not - find what works for you.


## What is burnout?

> Burnout is the extinction of motivation or incentive, where one's devotion to a cause or relationship fails to produce the desired results. (Freudenberger, 1975) Burnout is a reaction to prolonged or chronic job stress and is characterized by three main dimensions: exhaustion, cynicism (less identification with the job), and feelings of reduced professional ability.

There are 5 stages to burnout - you can read more about them [here.](https://www.thisiscalmer.com/blog/5-stages-of-burnout)


Common symptoms below:

- Getting out of bed felt so much harder
- Feeling very unhappy and possibly lashing out / emotional at work or home
- A lot slower and less productive at work (fixing a trivial bug would take me hours rather than minutes)
- You can't seem to stop thinking about work at all, to a point where your weekends are also about work
- Body pain (for me, my back pain got worse)
- Loss of sleep/insomnia
- Loss of appetite / eating less
- You feel like quitting (a bit extreme, but you might feel it)
- Your job / what you do no longer sparks any joy compared to before
- Apathy towards everything in life


Other symptoms you could experience:
- Stomach pain/bowel problems
- Other behavioural changes
- Exhaustion, feeling out of control
- Headaches


And it can feel like a never-ending cycle. I was stuck in a cycle of having stress and anxiety, which lead to a lot of the symptoms above (and for me, not having enough sleep makes me cranky), which lead to uncontrollable emotions and lashing out both at work and at home, which caused me to feel guilty, be less productive, more stress and anxiety, and the cycle goes again.


I'm still recovering, and after researching the condition and reading up on how to get out of it - these were some things that helped me. Note that what works for me may not necessarily work for you, and vice versa. So it's a bit of trial and error - find out what works for you.

### Do a brainstorm on why you're burnout or stressed.

This is probably the first step I would do before starting anything else. Write the word 'stress' in the middle of a page, and start brainstorming what's causing you to be stressed and why you're stressed or feeling this way. Write down anything that comes to mind. It could be more than 1 thing, not just work. Maybe something at home might be bothering you. This exercise helped me pinpoint why I was stressed, and a lot of it came from just feeling no control over my work/environment, feeling incompetent / suffering from imposter syndrome every day, while balancing more work responsibilities. 

For any scrum masters out there this is something I learnt the hard way: If you feel like you have no control over something and tried to get control over it but no one's listening to you, maybe just let it be. I tried forcing my team to adhere to behaviours and it didn't work. I felt stressed over it because I had no control over them. What does work is giving advice and letting the team discover their problems and find ways to solve them. That is what a scrum master should do - you empower the team to discover their problems, work together to address them and decide whether change is needed. There will be times where you have to tell people "no, that's not right" and say why, but it's up to them to decide whether to change or not.


### Tell someone.

When I started complaining to my friends, my friends told me it was abnormal for me to be like this and urged me to take a break from work. That was when I started researching burnout. It took me a while to tell my manager at work, and if you have a good manager, they will listen to you, support you and may give you advice. Having a good supportive work environment also really helps, as they could also help lessen the load or let you take things a bit slower at your own pace.


### Start doing some form of exercise. 

If you already do exercise, great! I'm a couch potato when it comes to exercise. I know it's good for me, but I'm terrible at doing it! But when I starting having back pain that seemed to never go away, I decided to give yoga a go. And it sort of worked. 
It doesn't mean you have to do yoga, but it's good to do some form of exercise to get your body moving and take time off to not think about anything (it's hard, but it works).

### Turn off your work computer and work profile on your phone.

Ever since I started bringing my work laptop home (in case of another lockdown, which could happen any time and saves me from having to do an extra round trip to the office), I would sometimes keep working after hours and during the weekends, which caused more stress. I also ended up doing work on days I took leave on which was not a good idea. So to stop this, I turned my laptop off and left it in my bag. The reason for turning it fully off and not just on 'sleep' is so that I wouldn't be able to quickly 'resume' to the work. Turning it off meant the next time I turned it on, I would have to spend about 5 mins to set up my environments again. And for me, that was enough to turn me off from work. If this doesn't work for you, it might mean you need more extreme cases such as no access during weekends.
Turning off your work profile on your phone also means you won't get emails or keep looking. It took me a while to get rid of the urge to constantly monitor Slack and read emails after hours, but this helped.

### Take a break / take time off.

I tried doing this but it didn't really help since I ended up just being holed up at home and still thinking too much about work - but it probably would work if I could go travel and go elsewhere. If you do have some annual leave or if you're allowed to take some time off work, do it but go with a plan (doesn't have to be detailed, just maybe where you want to go and what you want to do).
It will let your mind rest, figure out itself and take time to recharge and most importantly you don't have to think about work or whatever it is that's causing you to burn out. If you can't get out into a different environment or place, maybe plan a staycation.

### Find something you'd like to do after hours and remember your goals.

Look at what you used to do that brought you joy - your hobbies. Think about how you can get back into them - it could mean taking up classes or learning something new online. Think about what you want to do now, and where you want to be. Remember to start small and ease into it. Revisiting your goals help you identify if whether you do need to take the extreme - find another job and quit. This is to make sure if your current job aligns with what you aspire to do. If you're not enjoying the work you're doing because it no longer aligns with your goals, then maybe it's time to move on.

Other solutions you could try:
- Meditation and mindfulness
- Get more sleep
- Switch to a healthy, more balanced diet
- Taking mini-breaks at work


### And most importantly, be kind to yourself.

Take care and take your time. Burnout is a serious issue, and it's becoming more and more common. But there is always hope and you can always recover from it.

---

## Acknowledgements, references, resources:

- *Burnout: The High Cost of High Achievement* - book by Herbert Freudenberger, 1974 (initial definition of burnout)
- [Burnout symptoms and treatment - VeryWellMind](https://www.verywellmind.com/stress-and-burnout-symptoms-and-causes-3144516)
- [5 stages of burnout - Calmer](https://www.thisiscalmer.com/blog/5-stages-of-burnout)
- [How to tell if you've got pre-burnout - BBC](https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20190610-how-to-tell-if-youve-got-pre-burnout)
- [A guide to burnout - Healthline](https://www.healthline.com/health/tips-for-identifying-and-preventing-burnout)
- [Burnout prevention and recovery - Help Guide](https://www.helpguide.org/articles/stress/burnout-prevention-and-recovery.htm)
- [A flaming shot of burnout - Podcast by Front End Happy Hour](https://frontendhappyhour.com/episodes/a-flaming-shot-of-burnout/) 



